[go back](https://github.com/pkardas/learning)

# The Pragmatic Programmer: journey to mastery, 20th Anniversary Edition

Book by David Thomas and Andrew Hunt

- [Chapter 1: A Pragmatic Philosophy](#chapter-1-a-pragmatic-philosophy)

## Chapter 1: A Pragmatic Philosophy

**You Have Agency.** It is your life. You own it. You run it. You create it. This industry gives you a remarkable set of
opportunities. Be proactive, and take them.

The team needs to be able to trust you and rely on you, and you need to be comfortable relying on each of them as well.
In a healthy environment based in trust, you can safely speak your mind, present your ideas, and rely on your team
members who can in turn rely on you.

**Provide options, don't make lame excuses.** Instead of excuses provide options. Don;t say it can't be done: explain
what can be done to salvage the solution. When you find yourself saying "_I don't know_" be sure to follow it up with
"_--but I'll find out_". It is a great way to admit what you don;t know, but then take responsibility like a pro.

_Entropy_ - a term from physics that refers to the amount of "disorder" in a system. The entropy in the universe tends
toward a maximum. When disorder increases in software, we call it "software rot". Some folks might call it by the more
optimistic term "_technical debt_" (with the implied notion that they will pay it back someday, they probably will not).

**Don't live with broken windows.** Bad designs, wrong decisions, or poor code. Fix each one as soon as it is
discovered. If there is no sufficient time to fix it properly, board it up. Take some action to prevent further damage
and to show that you are on top of the situation. Don't let entropy win. If you find yourself working on a project with
quite a few broken windows, it is all to easy to slip into the mindset of "_All the rest of this code is crap, I will
just follow suit._". By the same token, if you find yourself on a project where the code is beautiful, well-designed,
and elegant - you will likely take extra special care not to mess it up.

Idea: Help strengthen your team by surveying your project neighbourhood. Choose two or three broken windows and discuss
with your colleagues what the problems are and what could be done to fix them.

**Be a catalyst for change.** You may be in a situation where you know exactly what needs doing and how to do it. People
will form committees, budgets will need approval, and things will get complicated. Work out what can you reasonably ask
for.Develop it well. Once you have got it, show people, and let them marvel. Sit back and wait for them to start asking
you to add the functionality you originally wanted. Show them a glimpse of the future, and you will get them to rally
around.

**Remember the Big Picture.** Constantly review what is happening around you, not just what you personally are doing.
Projects slowly and inexorably get totally out of hand.Most software disasters start out too small to notice, and most
projects overruns happen a day at a time. It is often the accumulation of small things that breaks morale and teams.

Situational awareness (is there anything out of context, anything that looks like it doesn't belong), a technique
practiced by folks ranging from Boy and Girl Scouts and Navy SEALs. Get in a habit of really looking and noticing your
surroundings.
